What is Generative AI?
Generative AI is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning 
(ML) that involves the creation of original data or content, including images, 
video, text, code and 3D renderings. This subfield has been developing over 
several decades and is rapidly evolving, due to advances and availability 
in computational power, large datasets and significant improvements in 
machine learning algorithms. Generative AI models are based on deep 
learning algorithms that learn to recognize patterns and relationships from 
vast amounts of input data, which then generate new outputs that are similar 
in style and structure to the data they were trained on.
The ability of these models to self-formulate new and varied outputs 
represents a paradigm shift in the field of AI because they are not being 
explicitly programmed to follow pre-determined rules, or generate specific 
outputs, like other AI systems. This will likely lead to a change in how we 
interface with computers, and more broadly, in how we access, understand, 
and produce knowledge and information. 

Core Concepts
Building Blocks of Generative AI
» Supervised and semi-supervised 
learning - A machine learning 
technique that helps algorithms 
learn to recognize patterns and make 
predictions based on categorized 
or labeled data. In the case of 
semisupervised learning, algorithms 
are trained on both labeled and 
unlabeled data to detect patterns 
and make predictions.

» Deep learning - A machine learning 
technique that uses layers of neural 
networks to process data and make 
decisions.
» Neural networks - An AI method 
that simulates the structure and 
function of the human brain. Neural 
networks process information 
through interconnected nodes that 
are organized in a layered structure. 
This computational model serves as 
the basis of deep learning and is used 
in various types of generative models.

» Generative Adversarial Network 
(GAN) - A machine learning 
model that uses two neural 
networks—a generator and a 
discriminator—to produce new 
data that is similar to a given data 
set. GANs have become a popular 
approach for generative AI in 
various domains, such as image 
and video generation.
» Transformer - A type of neural 
network that uses encoders and 
decoders to generate the best 
probability for the following 
word in a sentence. Transformers 
enable the development of 
powerful generative models.
» Large Language Model (LLM) - 
A statistical AI model that is 
trained on massive amounts 
of text data and predicts the 
probability of sequences of words 
to produce human-like text 
responses.

» Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) - A subfield of AI that is at 
the intersection of linguistics, 
computer science and machine 
learning. NLP enables computer 
programs to process and 
analyze large amounts of natural 
language data. It uses a range 
of computational methods and 
algorithms to allow machines, 
such as chatbots and voice 
assistants, to understand and 
mimic written or spoken human 
language.
» Generative Pre-trained 
Transformer (GPT) - A type of 
LLM developed by the research 
lab OpenAI that uses deep 
learning and NLP techniques. 
GPT underlies the user-facing, 
general-purpose chatbot, 
ChatGPT, which produces humanlike conversational responses in 
reaction to short user prompts.

Value Proposition
Proponents of generative AI believe that this set of converging technologies is poised to revolutionize the economy, spur 
productivity and transform industries—from education, healthcare and finance to infrastructure development. According 
to new research, it is estimated that generative AI systems could increase annual global Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 
7 percent over a 10-year period (Briggs and Kodnani, 2023). Early data suggests that a massive transformation is already 
underway, as Big Tech companies have begun to quickly roll out and integrate new generative AI tools and features into 
their products, including search engines and office suite software. The intense competition in Silicon Valley to develop and 
deploy these tools, however, has prompted concerns among many regulators and ethical AI researchers. Some of these 
concerns include the risk of perpetuating bias and discrimination, spreading mis- and disinformation, and infringing on 
intellectual property rights. Discussions regarding generative AI’s value proposition are full of debate and uncertainties. 
Below, we explore contrasting views on the potential benefits of these technologies, highlighting three interwoven 
features at the core of its value proposition: efficiency, personalization, and creativity and innovation.

WHAT ADVOCATES SAY WHAT SKEPTICS SAY WHY THE UN SHOULD CARE
EFFICIENCY
There are many opportunities for 
businesses and organizations to 
maximize their potential using 
generative AI tools. One such benefit 
can include increased efficiency by 
automating tasks that involve complex 
reasoning, pattern recognition and large 
data sets. In the long term, this type 
of automation could reduce business 
costs and increase productivity. It 
could also accelerate the speed of 
iteration, allowing for faster learning and 
improvements, which can drive business 
performance. 
According to economists, foundation 
models could impact every sector of 
the economy and lead to significant 
economic growth. It is predicted that 
generative AI will likely create disruption 
across some industries and drive 
demand for new skills. This includes 
roles for prompt engineers and data 
practitioners that can integrate, finetune, and improve generative AI models 
into existing products and pipelines. 
It also creates greater demand for AI 
safety professionals to manage the AI 
systems’ shortcomings and work to 
ensure their responsible use.
While generative AI systems can 
help an organization run more 
efficiently, training and operating 
these models is expensive and can 
be cost-prohibitive. This is due in 
part to the specialized hardware 
and significant amount of memory 
and storage space these systems 
require to support the high volume of 
calculations models typically produce. 
With continued advances in the field 
of AI, however, costs associated with 
generative AI models are expected to 
decrease over time, which could make 
them more accessible. Researchers 
estimate that millions of jobs across 
large economies could be exposed 
to some degree of automation. 
Certain white-collar positions are 
considered to be at greater risk of 
being altered or displaced by text 
generation tools such as ChatGPT. 
This includes jobs in tech (e.g., coders, 
computer programmers), media (e.g., 
advertising professionals, journalists) 
and finance (e.g., financial analysts 
and advisors), as well as educators 
and customer service agents.
By automating certain functions, generative AI systems 
can free up time and resources for more high-value tasks, 
such as policy development and advocacy. 
One key area where generative AI can be leveraged is in 
writing and research-related tasks. Generative models 
can be trained to generate text for various purposes, 
such as drafting grant proposals, or summarizing large 
documents. 
Generative AI can also assist with coding tasks by 
providing descriptive code documentation. This can help 
developers to understand complex code bases more 
quickly and easily, leading to more efficient and effective 
software development. In addition, generative AI can be 
integrated into software interfaces, allowing end-users to 
interact with their software using natural language. This 
can improve their experience and make software more 
accessible to non-technical end-users. 
Generative AI tools can facilitate near-real-time translation 
and transcription, which could enhance the delivery of 
critical services to underserved communities. For instance, 
the UN could use generative AI to provide real-time 
translation services to refugees or to transcribe speeches 
at international conferences. 
Generative AI models, however, lack an inherent 
understanding of the content they generate, and instead 
rely on predicting the most probable next words based on 
the patterns derived from a large corpus of textual data. 
Hence, they can be considered as personal assistants 
rather than authoritative decision-makers

WHAT ADVOCATES SAY WHAT SKEPTICS SAY WHY THE UN SHOULD CARE
PERSONALIZATION
Generative AI systems could reduce 
the barriers to entry for non-experts 
to engage in highly specialized 
work that was previously limited 
to people with relevant technical 
skills and knowledge. For example, 
by automating data analysis or 
facilitating access to information 
through user-friendly interfaces. 
Organizations will likely see a 
greater return on investment 
by using customized generative 
models that are fine-tuned with 
their own data. This can lead to 
more tailored results, which would 
better address the organization’s 
specific needs. Personalization can 
also improve user experience and 
engagement.
Since generative AI models are trained on 
a vast amount of data, it can be difficult to 
explain how a system arrived at a particular 
result or response. This lack of explainability 
poses huge risks and could lead to unintended 
consequences. For instance, AI systems 
can reinforce patterns of systemic bias 
and discrimination if their training data is 
flawed, biased, or unrepresentative. Without 
explainable outputs, it could be challenging, 
or impossible, to pinpoint the source of a 
problem and develop a mitigation strategy. 
A lack of transparency could also make it 
difficult to trust the results of the generative 
model. This is particularly worrying in cases 
when automated decision-making may be 
used to determine outcomes in high-stakes 
contexts such as healthcare, social services 
and law enforcement.
As a multilingual organization with numerous 
specialized entities, one of the key advantages of 
generative AI for the UN is its ability to be trained on 
specialized vocabulary and terminology. Moreover, 
these models can be integrated into existing 
interfaces, which can help boost rapid information 
discovery and automate knowledge management. 
Perhaps most importantly, generative AI can be 
applied in the context of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). For example, generative AI can provide 
marginalized communities with improved access to 
critical services such as healthcare and education. 
Generative AI can help detect diseases early and 
provide personalized health recommendations based 
on an individual’s medical history, promoting health 
and well-being (SDG 3). It can also facilitate the 
provision of quality education (SDG 4) through the 
creation of personalized learning experiences, making 
education accessible to those who may not have 
access to traditional learning opportunities. 
To promote responsible use of generative AI, the 
UN could take steps to ensure that personalization 
features of generative AI do not result in negative 
consequences—such as perpetuating biases or 
exacerbating existing inequalities—especially for 
marginalized populations

CREATIVITY & INNOVATION
Generative AI tools offer several 
opportunities to help augment 
human creativity. For example, 
by prompting discussion and 
generating new ideas, which 
could spark people’s imagination 
and possibly help them 
overcome writer’s block. This 
collaborative ideation tool could 
assist in spurring the creation 
of innovative products, services, 
business strategies and advocacy 
campaigns. One of the biggest 
draws of generative AI systems 
is their potential to change the 
nature of how cognitive work is 
performed. 
Educators are also considering 
how generative AI could assist 
in creating engaging activities, 
including games and simulations, 
which could help students better 
understand abstract or other 
difficult to grasp concepts.
Some critics have raised concerns that 
generative AI systems that have been trained 
on copyrighted works, may infringe on the 
intellectual property rights of professional 
artists, writers and programmers. Several 
lawsuits have been filed against companies 
that have used copyrighted material in their 
training data without the permission of (or 
attribution to) its content creators. 
Another common concern among critics, is 
students’ use of highly proficient generative 
AI tools to complete writing assignments, 
as these programs can make it harder for 
professors and other academics to spot 
instances of plagiarism. 
Additionally, generative AI systems cannot 
always be relied on for accurate information 
as they occasionally “hallucinate” or produce 
falsehoods. This occurs when a system fails 
to understand its prompts and confidently 
produces outputs that do not match the 
data it has been trained on. Researchers are 
concerned that generative AI models could 
make large-scale mis- and disinformation 
cheaper and easier to produce and 
disseminate. While there are some steps that 
can be taken to try to reduce instances of 
“hallucinations” (e.g., through reinforcement 
learning with human feedback and input), 
completely eliminating these falsehoods is a 
persistent challenge.
Generative AI can enable marginalized communities 
to tap into new and innovative resources and 
networks, which can help create jobs and generate 
economic opportunities (SDG 8). For instance, 
generative AI can help democratize access to 
education and training, which can equip people with 
the skills they need to succeed in the digital economy. 
Leveraging generative AI can also help reduce 
inequalities (SDG 10). For instance, AI technologies can 
be used to identify and address disparities in access 
to education and healthcare services. AI-powered 
platforms can also help marginalized communities 
connect with potential employers and access training 
and development resources. 
The UN should take proactive measures to encourage 
creativity and innovation within the bounds of ethical 
and legal principles by implementing policies that 
promote transparency, accountability and fair use 
of AI-generated content, especially from creative 
industries.